fix: add undocumented options in `integrations-reference.mdx` (#10822)
withastro/docs: src/content/docs/en/reference/integrations-reference.mdx

    'astro:server:start'?: (options: {
      address: AddressInfo;
      logger: AstroIntegrationLogger;
    }) => void | Promise<void>;
    'astro:server:done'?: (options: {
      logger: AstroIntegrationLogger;
    }) => void | Promise<void>;
    'astro:build:start'?: (options: {
      logger: AstroIntegrationLogger;
    }) => void | Promise<void>;
    'astro:build:setup'?: (options: {
      vite: vite.InlineConfig;
      pages: Map<string, PageBuildData>;
      target: 'client' | 'server';
      updateConfig: (newConfig: vite.InlineConfig) => void;
      logger: AstroIntegrationLogger;
    }) => void | Promise<void>;
    'astro:build:ssr'?: (options: {
      manifest: SerializedSSRManifest;
      entryPoints: Map<IntegrationRouteData, URL>;
      middlewareEntryPoint: URL | undefined;
      logger: AstroIntegrationLogger;
    }) => void | Promise<void>;
    'astro:build:generated'?: (options: {
      dir: URL;
      logger: AstroIntegrationLogger;
    }) => void | Promise<void>;
    'astro:build:done'?: (options: {
      pages: { pathname: string }[];
      dir: URL;
      /** @deprecated Use the `assets` map and the new `astro:routes:resolved` hook */

>       routes: IntegrationRouteData[];

Author: With content collections, we had [`getEntryById`](https://v4.docs.astro.build/en/reference/modules/astro-content/#getdataentrybyid) and [`getEntryBySlug`](https://v4.docs.astro.build/en/reference/modules/astro-content/#getentrybyslug) in docs even though they were obsolete. So I think it's the same here and as long as they are available they should be in the documentation?
But perhaps we don't need to show that in the `Quick API Reference`.

>       routes: IntegrationRouteData[];

Author: Just pushed a commit to remove this option from the `Quick API Reference` So I'm marking this as resolved, feel free to undo the resolution if you think this needs further discussion!

      writeFileSync(new URL('cache.json', codegenDir), '{}', 'utf-8')
    }
  }
}
```

### `astro:route:setup`

<p><Since v="4.14.0" /></p>

**Previous hook:** [`astro:config:setup`](#astroconfigsetup)

**Next hook:** [`astro:routes:resolved`](#astroroutesresolved)

**When:** In `astro build`, before bundling starts. In `astro dev`, while building the module graph and on every change to a file based route (added/removed/updated).

**Why:** To set options for a route at build or request time, such as enabling [on-demand server rendering](/en/guides/on-demand-rendering/#enabling-on-demand-rendering).

```js
'astro:route:setup'?: (options: {
  route: RouteOptions;
  logger: AstroIntegrationLogger;
}) => void | Promise<void>;
```

#### `route` option

<p>

**Type:** [`RouteOptions`](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/3b10b97a4fecd1dfd959b160a07b5b8427fe40a7/packages/astro/src/types/public/integrations.ts#L14-L27)
</p>

An object with a `component` property to identify the route and the following additional values to allow you to configure the generated route: `prerender`.

##### `route.component`

<p>
**Type:** `string`<br />
<Since v="4.14.0" />
</p>

> The `component` property is a readonly string path relative to the project root, e.g `"src/pages/blog/[slug].astro"`. Its value helps you identify the route being set up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `component` property indicates the entrypoint that will be rendered on the route. You can access this value before the routes are built to configure on-demand server rendering for that page.
```

import { writeFileSync } from 'node:fs'

const integration = {
  name: 'my-integration',
  hooks: {
    'astro:config:setup': ({ createCodegenDir }) => {
      const codegenDir = createCodegenDir()
      writeFileSync(new URL('cache.json', codegenDir), '{}', 'utf-8')
    }
  }
}
```

### `astro:route:setup`

<p><Since v="4.14.0" /></p>

**Previous hook:** [`astro:config:setup`](#astroconfigsetup)

**Next hook:** [`astro:routes:resolved`](#astroroutesresolved)

> **When:** In `astro dev`, whenever a route is requested. In `astro build`, while bundling and transforming a route file.

Author: Is this part correct: `whenever a route is requested`? Or is it just me who is having trouble understanding the nuance (not a native speaker)?
I mean, from my tests, `astro:route:setup` in dev mode is not call again when a route is requested (while browsing the website). However, like `astro:routes:resolved`, `it also runs on every change to a file based route (added/removed/updated).` (taking Fryuni suggestion)

Author: Ok, so does this seem more accurate to you:
```suggestion
**When:** Before bundling starts. In `astro dev`, it also runs on every change to a file based route (added/removed/updated).
```
Or I misunderstand how Vite works and there is another difference between `dev`/`build`?

Reviewer 2: That is... ok...

Technically there is no bundling at all during `dev`, but I don't think that matters here.

Author: Oh yes! I haven't paid enough attention to the wording... I was hoping to find a description short enough to gather the two. In dev, it's more a module graph setup if I'm not mistaken (sorry if there are any approximations... I've dug into the SSR side a bit in the past but I'm not really familiar with the technical details of how Vite works under the hood)

Does something like that seems better/short enough?
```suggestion
**When:** In `astro build`, before bundling starts. In `astro dev`, while building the module graph and on every change to a file based route (added/removed/updated).
```

Reviewer 2: That's great!

##### `route.prerender`

<p>
**Type:** `boolean`<br />
**Default:** `undefined`<br />
<Since v="4.14.0" />
</p>

The `prerender` property is used to configure [on-demand server rendering](/en/guides/on-demand-rendering/#enabling-on-demand-rendering) for a route. If the route file contains an explicit `export const prerender` value, the value will be used as the default instead of `undefined`.

```js title="astro.config.mjs"
import { defineConfig } from 'astro/config';

export default defineConfig({
  integrations: [setPrerender()],
});

function setPrerender() {
  return {
    name: 'set-prerender',
    hooks: {
      'astro:route:setup': ({ route }) => {
        if (route.component.endsWith('/blog/[slug].astro')) {
          route.prerender = true;
        }
      },
    },
  };
}
```
 
If the final value after running all the hooks is `undefined`, the route will fall back to a prerender default based on the [`output` option](/en/reference/configuration-reference/#output): prerendered for `static` mode, and on-demand rendered for `server` mode.

### `astro:routes:resolved`

<p>

<Since v="5.0.0" />
</p>

**Previous hook:** [`astro:route:setup`](#astroroutesetup)

> **Next hook:** [`astro:config:done`](#astroconfigdone)

Reviewer 2: A bit tricky here. This hook also runs whenever routes change during dev mode, so it can run after `astro:config:done`.

Author: Now that I'm testing again, it seems a bit inconsistent (even with `astro:route:setup`). Something to do with the cache perhaps (just a guess)? Or my website not being well optimized, I have some custom setup that I need to improve... 😅 

The first run seemed a bit mixed up:
```
...
22:58:28 - astro:route:setup
22:58:28 - astro:route:setup
22:58:28 - astro:routes:resolved
22:58:28 - astro:config:done
22:58:28 - astro:server:setup
22:58:28 [types] Generated 0ms
22:58:28 [content] Syncing content
22:58:28 [content] Synced content
22:58:28 - astro:route:setup
22:58:28 - astro:route:setup
...
22:58:29 - astro:server:start
 astro  v5.1.10 ready in 1574 ms
┃ Local    http://localhost:4321/
┃ Network  use --host to expose

22:58:29 watching for file changes...
22:58:29 - astro:route:setup
22:58:29 - astro:route:setup
...
22:58:29 - astro:route:setup
22:58:29 - astro:routes:resolved
22:58:29 - astro:route:setup
...
22:58:29 - astro:routes:resolved
```
The next two runs, I see:
```
23:04:33 - astro:route:setup
23:04:33 - astro:route:setup
23:04:33 - astro:routes:resolved
23:04:33 - astro:config:done
23:04:33 - astro:server:setup
23:04:33 [types] Generated 0ms
23:04:33 [content] Syncing content
23:04:33 [content] Synced content
23:04:33 - astro:server:start
 astro  v5.1.10 ready in 1883 ms

┃ Local    http://localhost:4321/
┃ Network  use --host to expose
// No other hook calls after
```
So what is described...

However, with these three tests, I don't see the hook being called again while navigating... But perhaps my test is not accurate enough. I'm using something similar to: https://blog.logrocket.com/understanding-astro-integrations-hooks-lifecycle/#examining-hooks-evaluation-order (with the missing hooks)
Also this is a static website, it's possible that with SSR it works differently... So great call!

Author: After doing more testing, perhaps we could add something like:
```suggestion
**Next hook:** [`astro:config:done`](#astroconfigdone) when setting up the server in "dev" mode or during production builds
```
In addition to your rewording for `When:`.

Reviewer 2: > So I guess you're right! But still, my first run seems a bit inconsistent... I don't know if it's my setup.

Your first run will cause a sync, which is adding files, so they run again in response to those events.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps this:
```suggestion
**Next hook:** [`astro:config:done`](#astroconfigdone) (only during setup)
```

It's simpler and applies for dev and build.

Author: I'm fine with your suggestion!

> Your first run will cause a sync

Yes that's what I thought afterwards... I was just confused because I didn't expect a difference. Thanks for the confirmation!

> **Next hook:** [`astro:config:done`](#astroconfigdone)

Author: After doing more testing, perhaps we could add something like:
```suggestion
**Next hook:** [`astro:config:done`](#astroconfigdone) when setting up the server in "dev" mode or during production builds
```
In addition to your rewording for `When:`.

> **When:** In `astro dev`, it also runs if a file based route changes (added/removed/updated).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**When:** In `astro dev`, it also runs on every change to a file based route (added/removed/updated).
```

I think it is better to note that it can run multiple times, not once in case an update happens.

An object with a `component` property to identify the route and the following additional values to allow you to configure the generated route: `prerender`.

##### `route.component`

<p>
**Type:** `string`<br />
<Since v="4.14.0" />
</p>

> The `component` property is a readonly string path relative to the project root, e.g `"src/pages/blog/[slug].astro"`. Its value helps you identify the route being set up.

Reviewer 3: I think this is not always true, eg. for injected routes that reference package exports

Author: You mean when the injected routes comes from `node_modules`? The path would not be `./node_modules/...`?

Reading [the JSDoc](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/c497491cfe6a03f6a2118392d198ee1738754629/packages/astro/src/types/public/integrations.ts#L15-L19), it seems a relative path is always the expected format, right? Looking at the [hook implementation](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/c497491cfe6a03f6a2118392d198ee1738754629/packages/astro/src/integrations/hooks.ts#L650), I see `route.component` being used in the logger... But I have no idea what else to expect than a path to a file. 😅 

Do you have an example of what this might be (or a direction where I could look)?

Author: Yeah I understand that, but I have to admit that I am having a bit of trouble understanding the problem with the description (except that the property name is wrong but it is the name currently in use and we are documenting what currently exists).
But again, I'm not the integration expert here... So maybe some things that seem obvious to you, aren't obvious to me due to a lack of knowledge in this context.

I had tested on my own website where I have both static routes, dynamic routes, endpoints, and injected routes (but which do not refer to `node_modules`) and in every case, using `console.log(route.component)`, I see:
```
src/pages/en/index.astro
src/pages/en/[slug].astro
src/pages/feed.xml.ts
src/components/atoms/button/button.stories.astro
```
(`stories.astro` are my injected routes if you are wondering)

So it seems to me the description matches what I get. But I haven't tested with an import from a package, so maybe that's the problem...

Reviewer 3: Yeah I was thinking about a package import

Author: So I tried to find an existing package that I could use to test... there is `astrojs/web-vitals` but it still mentions Astro Studio, so I thought maybe it wasn't the best solution...

I went with a fake package (inspired by a [fake fixture in the core repo](https://github.com/withastro/astro/blob/f98e29d141ef5202cde6add62d451f55dab8cd00/packages/astro/test/fixtures/custom-404-injected-from-dep/astro.config.mjs)) and pnpm workspaces:
```
packages:
  - "fake-packages/*"
```

Using `logger.info(route.component)`, I see `[astro-route-setup] fake-packages/custom-404-pkg/404.astro`.
So it's using a relative path, right? However, perhaps because this is a workspace package, it's using the actual path instead of a path from `node_modules`... But I guess for an installed package, it will be `node-modules/fake-packages/...`.

Reviewer 3: mmh i think it will remain a relative path. We're good then!

Reviewer 3: @Fryuni you probably know more about this than me

'astro:config:done'?: (options: {
  config: AstroConfig;
  setAdapter: (adapter: AstroAdapter) => void;

>   injectTypes: (injectedType: InjectedType) => URL;

Reviewer 3: Should we add a link?

Author: Well, in the other "quick overviews" there was no links (e.g. `AstroAdapter` above) so I didn't add any here. Usually, the links are rather in the detailed properties. Here, it would be in `injectTypes() option` but the [type is already expanded](https://github.com/withastro/docs/blob/8dd180fe458bfa7f90c543c1098cad2bd124df09/src/content/docs/en/reference/integrations-reference.mdx?plain=1#L676).

I haven't touched this section, but if you think a link might be helpful we could slightly update the description:
```md
This function receives an `InjectedType` object with the following properties:
* `filename`, used to generate a file at ...
* `content`,  to create the body of the file from valid TypeScript.
```
And we could add the link on `InjectType` object?

Or:

```md
This function receives an object with the following properties:
// Same as above
```
So no link here, but we replace the `Type:` to show `InjectedType` with a link instead of the expanded object.

Reviewer 3: Alright the current diff is fine then!

}
```

#### `toolbar` option

<p>

**Type:** `ReturnType<typeof getToolbarServerCommunicationHelpers>`<br />
<Since v="4.7.0" />
</p>

An object providing callback functions to interact with the [dev toolbar](/en/reference/dev-toolbar-app-reference/):

##### `on()`

<p>

**Type:** `<T>(event: string, callback: (data: T) => void) => void`<br />
</p>

A function that takes an event name as first argument and a callback function as second argument. This allows you to receive a message from a dev toolbar app with data associated to that event.

##### `onAppInitialized()`

<p>

**Type:** `(appId: string, callback: (data: Record<string, never>) => void) => void`<br />
</p>

> A function fired when a dev toolbar app is initialized. The first argument is the id of the app that was initialized. The second argument is callback function to run when the app is initialized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A function fired when a dev toolbar app is initialized. The first argument is the id of the app that was initialized. The second argument is a callback function to run when the app is initialized.
```

##### `onAppToggled()`

<p>

**Type:** `(appId: string, callback: (data: { state: boolean; }) => void) => void`<br />
</p>

A function fired when a dev toolbar app is toggled on or off. The first argument is the id of the app that was toggled. The second argument is a callback function providing the state to execute when the application is toggled.

##### `send()`

<p>

**Type:** `<T>(event: string, payload: T) => void`<br />
</p>

> A function that takes an event name as first argument and a payload as second argument. The payload can be any serializable data. This allows you to send a message to the dev toolbar that an app can listen for.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A function that sends a message to the dev toolbar that an app can listen for. This takes an event name as the first argument and a payload as the second argument which can be any serializable data.
```

#### `pages` option

<p>

**Type:** `{ pathname: string }[]`
</p>

A list of all generated pages. It is an object with one property.

- `pathname` - the finalized path of the page.

### Custom hooks

Custom hooks can be added to integrations by extending the `IntegrationHooks` interface through [global augmentation](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/declaration-merging.html#global-augmentation).

```ts
declare global {
  namespace Astro {
    export interface IntegrationHook {
      'your:hook': (params: YourHookParameters) => Promise<void>
    }
  }
}
```

Astro reserves the `astro:` prefix for future built-in hooks. Please choose a different prefix when naming your custom hook.

## Integration types reference

### `AstroIntegrationLogger`

An instance of the Astro logger, useful to write logs. This logger uses the same [log level](/en/reference/cli-reference/#--verbose)
configured via CLI.

**Methods available** to write to terminal:
- `logger.info("Message")`;
- `logger.warn("Message")`;
- `logger.error("Message")`;
- `logger.debug("Message")`;

> All the messages are prepended with a label that has the same value of the integration.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
All the messages are prepended with a label that has the same value as the name of the integration.
```

Not sure if a word is missing there, it's old/moved content, but the "value of the integration" feels a bit weird to me.

Author: Yeah I think it sounds better, thanks for noticing that!
